Capitol Police investigating after pro-Israel House Dem says DC office was vandalized

      This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten,
      or redistributed. ©2024 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved.
      Quotes displayed in real-time or delayed by at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by
      Factset. Powered and implemented by
      FactSet Digital Solutions.
      Legal Statement. Mutual Fund and ETF data provided by
      Refinitiv Lipper.
    
Rep. Cory Mills, R-Fla., says President Biden and Democrats are pandering to anti-Israel groups in left-wing cities and states because it is where lawlessness occurs.
U.S. Capitol Police have launched an investigation after a House Democrat said his office was vandalized on the Fourth of July.
Rep. Brad Scheider, D-Ill., one of the most staunchly pro-Israel lawmakers in the House Democratic Caucus, posted a photo on X showing printouts depicting Israeli hostages being held by Hamas strewn across the hallway in the Cannon House Office Building.
"My Capitol office was vandalized yesterday in a vile act of hate in which the posters of the more than 100 people still held hostage in Gaza (including 8 Americans) were ripped from the wall, shredded and tossed across the hallway," Schneider, who is Jewish, wrote Friday.
"This was a shameful act on any day, but especially on July 4, our country’s Independence Day. Sadly, it was but one of many hateful, un-American actions that took place across the country on the day we celebrate freedom and democracy."
IDF SPOKESMAN SAYS GOAL OF COMPLETELY DESTROYING HAMAS IS UNATTAINABLE IN BLOW TO NETANYAHU
Rep. Brad Schneider said posters of Israeli hostages outside his office were torn down. (Samuel Corum/Getty Images)
Schneider also pointed out that dozens of anti-Israel protesters showed up at his family's home last weekend "banging drums, blowing horns and screaming antisemitic chants" at around 2:30 a.m.
"These actions don’t advance peace," he wrote on X. "Instead, they play directly into the hands of Hamas terrorists enabling them to continue to hold hostage not only those they kidnapped from Israel, but all civilians in Gaza as well."
GAZA MILITANTS FIRE ROCKETS INTO ISRAEL AS TANK ADVANCES INTENSIFY IN NORTH AND SOUTH
"We are aware and investigating," U.S. Capitol Police said of the matter. "To protect the investigation, we cannot provide any more information at this time."
Pro-Israel Democrats have faced intense backlash from progressives within their own party due to their support for Israel. 
Hamas' Oct. 7 terror attack in southern Israel and the Israeli government's response, including the invasion of Gaza, have revealed prominent fractures on the left, with a growing chorus of progressives attacking more traditional Democrats for wanting to uphold ties with Israel's conservative government.
ILLINOIS HIGH SCHOOL APOLOGIZES AFTER PRINTING QUOTE FROM STUDENT ‘HAPPY’ ABOUT OCT. 7 IN YEARBOOK
Members of the U.S. Capitol Police try to remove protesters from the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee during a demonstration against the war between Israel and Hamas Nov. 15, 2023, on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. (Alex Wong/Getty Images)
In February, a protester defaced the Brooklyn office of another Jewish House Democrat, Rep. Dan Goldman, D-N.Y., with what appeared to be red paint, according to the New York Post.
CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP
A month earlier, protesters attempted to forcibly break into the district office of Rep. Pat Ryan, D-N.Y., while staffers were inside blockading the doors, according to Jewish Insider.
Pro-cease-fire protesters also clashed with police in November last year in a tense demonstration outside Democratic National Committee headquarters on Capitol Hill while elected Democrat leaders were inside.
Fox News' Chad Pergram contributed to this report
Elizabeth Elkind is a politics reporter for Fox News Digital leading coverage of the House of Representatives. Previous digital bylines seen at Daily Mail and CBS News.
Follow on Twitter at @liz_elkind and send tips to elizabeth.elkind@fox.com
Get the latest updates from the 2024 campaign trail, exclusive interviews and more Fox News politics content.
Subscribed
You've successfully subscribed to this newsletter!

        This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2024 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. Quotes displayed in real-time or delayed by at least 15 minutes. Market data provided by
        Factset. Powered and implemented by
        FactSet Digital Solutions.
        Legal Statement. Mutual Fund and ETF data provided by
        Refinitiv Lipper.
      
